DOCS-8857 Add Trace Cluster Map Documentation (#25345)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/llm_observability/cluster_map/_index.md

--- 
title: Trace Cluster Map

> description: Learn how to monitor and optimize your LLM application's performance by identifying and addressing quality issues through trace clusters on the Clusters page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Identify your LLM application's drifts by viewing its Cluster Map.
```

Cutting down on the verbosity

further_reading: 
- link: "/llm_observability/" 
  tag: "Documentation" 
  text: "Learn about LLM Observability"
- link: "/llm_observability/terms/" 
  tag: "Documentation" 
  text: "Learn about LLM Observability Key Terms and Concepts"
---

## Overview

> You can monitor, optimize, and identify drifts in your LLM applications by visualizing trace data in clusters on the [Clusters page][1]. Select an application configured with LLM Observability to view cluster information. 

Reviewer 2: "You can identify drifts" is sufficient

Author: ```suggestion
You can identify drifts in your LLM applications by visualizing trace data in clusters on the [Clusters page][1]. Select an application configured with LLM Observability to view cluster information. 
```

> The Cluster Map allows you to view input or output, with each type grouped by [topic][2]. Inputs and outputs are clustered separately. Topics are determined by clustering the selected input or output into text embeddings in high dimensions, then projecting them into a 2D space. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster Maps display inputs or outputs, grouped by [topic][2]. Inputs and outputs are clustered separately. Topics are determined by clustering the selected input or output into text embeddings in high dimensions, then projecting them into a 2D space. 
```

I think the plural "Cluster Maps" is more intuitive than singular "the Cluster Map," since a user with multiple applications would have multiple Cluster Maps (c.f. Host Map and Container Map, both of which a user only has one)

> The Cluster Map allows you to view input or output (such as prompts or responses in your LLM application), with each type grouped by [topic][2] based on semantic similarity. Inputs and outputs are clustered separately, with the map or plot displaying either inputs or outputs in distinct groupings. Topics are determined by clustering the selected input or output into text embeddings in high dimensions, then projecting them into a 2D space. 

Reviewer 2: "(such as prompts or responses in your LLM application)" is not needed. input or output is the prompt or response

Reviewer 2: also think ", with the map or plot displaying either inputs or outputs in distinct groupings" is redundant

Reviewer 2: Let's remove "based on semantic similarity" since the last sentence touches on how the topics are grouped

Author: ```suggestion
The Cluster Map allows you to view input or output, with each type grouped by [topic][2]. Inputs and outputs are clustered separately. Topics are determined by clustering the selected input or output into text embeddings in high dimensions, then projecting them into a 2D space. 
```

{{< img src="llm_observability/cluster_map/scatter.png" alt="The scatter plot displays clusters of traces with color-coded topics and includes a panel listing clusters, trace counts, and failure rates." style="width:100%;" >}}

You can visualize the clusters by using a **Box Packing** or **Scatter Plot** layout. 

- Box Packing gives you a grouped view of each of the clusters and overlays any metrics or evaluations on every trace. 
- Scatter Plot, on the other hand, allows you to view the high dimensional text embeddings in a 2D space, although the distance between each trace may be misleading due to projection distortion. 

> The Cluster Map provides an overview of each cluster's performance across operational metrics, such as error types and latency, or [out-of-the-box or custom evaluations][3], enabling you to identify trends such as topic drift and additional quality issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster Maps provide an overview of each cluster's performance across operational metrics, such as error types and latency, or [out-of-the-box or custom evaluations][3], enabling you to identify trends such as topic drift and additional quality issues.
```

## Search and manage clusters

Customize your search query by selecting the sorting options to narrow down the clusters based on your specific criteria, such as evaluation metrics or time periods, for more targeted analysis.

1. Select `inputs` or `outputs` from the dropdown menu to see clusters for inputs or outputs grouped by topic.
1. Select an evaluation type or an evaluation score to color-code the clusters. For example, `Output Sentiment` for “What is the sentiment of the output?” or `duration` for “How long does it take for an LLM to generate an output (in nanoseconds)?” 

> 1. Select a field for the clusters to be sorted by: time, duration, or color. Then, select desc or asc to set the order. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select a field for the clusters to be sorted by: time, duration, or color. Then, select **desc** or **asc** to set the order. 
```

> Select a topic cluster from the list to examine how inputs or outputs about specific topics perform against other topics for each metric or evaluation, as well as see individual prompts and responses of each cluster. For example, you can quickly get an overview of your slowest topics when you overlay by `duration`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select a topic cluster from the list to examine how inputs or outputs about specific topics perform against other topics for each metric or evaluation. You can also see individual prompts and responses for each cluster. For example, you can get an overview of your slowest topics when you overlay by `duration`.
```
